Before this Journal was composed:
The mechanical design was chosen and printed. (their is a lost physical journal that details this if it is found the data will be added to this journal)
2/2/2026:
wrote software to debug GPS but the QWIIC cable seems to be unreliable. Therefore the reliability cannot be checked. 
It was considered to try using the main wire bus but that would interfere with the IMU as they opperate at different voltages. But it were better long term that they should be kept sepparate because this allows for a faster data transfer.
However this was done temporalily to confirm that the issue is the wiring.

2/3/2026:
Having replaced the QWIIC cable the GPS seems to work but requires the system to check it frequently or the buffer will overflow and all data will be lost. 
The GPS does not work well indoors, this should not be an issue at competition but will certainly make development harder as there are 6" of snow on the ground. This will be considered working for now.

2/9/2026:
The Motor was tested with the Servo test. because they both use RC car PWM they interface in the same way with the Arduino.
it is regretted that  this log was not kept in detail from the start. as now i must recall what I did in earlier times.

2/24/2026:
The Motor was tested in the chassis but this broke the motor mount and the gearbox connectors. So those will be reprinted with ABS and higher infill in their new variations. The Servo_test has been modified so that future oppperation of the motor can happen at much lower speeds.

2/25/2026:
The IMU was discarded because of poor soldering and replaced with my own. mpu_tuner was created to test the new one and it works.

The main code for competition was created and integrations for the individual components are being added to eventually build into a coherent whole. because they each have their own test it is hoped that this will not result in problems caused by a lack of testing as the code is built.

The base is redesigned to hold the battery and ESC better.

2/27/2026:
connected and expanded the bluetooth section of Senior project to include debugging of sensor data verified the data as resonable. added GPS to Senior project. Created wire.txt to record the configuration of the wires of the main circuitry, this is assembled to demonstrate validity.

3/3/2026:
Senior project has been expanded to include all parts except the encoder (as their is still no way to connect that to the chassis). A preliminary Kalman filter has been implemented but it is unstable and regulary sets things to nan. 

The drive shaft failed again this time only the motor gear itself that is to be modified and reprinted with petg.

3/4/2026:
The kalman filter is simplified by the addition of matrix algebra. This revealed that the problem lies in the way the IMU data is interpretted specifically the forward acceleration. The system assumes that the car is always level which is not the case. It must be decided whether the IMU will still be used for acceleration at all. for now it seems that the solution is to make the Q value very high but this means that the math is still done with very little help. The theoretical background says that adding more data is always helpfull no matter how much but if the balance isn't right it can destroy the system. as I have not yet found a way to measure the values of Q I cannot trust a new sensor unless it makes the effect better and the accelerometer makes things worse.
The modified gears did not work so now a modified gearbox is to be tried.
The next thing once the system is running is to add the speedometers, one on each wheel so that they can measure more accurately. it is considered that the chasis may need to be modified to accomadate them.

3/6/2026:
The modified gearbox seems to work alright when it is well oiled. the oil was not used before and the addition of it seems to have greatly improved efficiency. it seems that this vehicle works well enough that it could be used for competition. but as it drives poorly and the speedometers are still missing a serious redesign of the gear system is proposed for the spring break, which begins tommorow.
waypoint_generator.js is created to enable one to graphically set the course of the machine through the area with barrels displayed for context. currently the plan for the ramp is to tell the computer that it is not there and hope the machine is smart enough to figure it out but this must be tested first.
the accelerometer is found to be unreliable for dirrect speed because slight tilt can make it confuse gravity for motion and get way off. for now the Q and R values will be increased but it is hoped to control for this eventually.

3/9/2026:
Correction the gearbox does not work it makes the wheels spin but when the load of the car is placed upon it the gears start slipping. therefore the next eddition of the gearbox will have more stable gear mounts that hold the gears together.

because errors in the initial conditions make the kalman filter unstable an update start function is created to get the correct data. because of the high error the accelerometer will no longer be used for speed. the speed estimate provided by the gps is much more stable. it is hoped that with the addition of the spedometers the speed estimates will be known even better.

3/26/2026:
The gearbox has been completely redesigned to allow for much greater stability of the gears forcing them to stay in alignment whereas before they bent out of place. This widening also allows for the speedometer and interuptors to be placed hopefully allowing the addition of the speedometer system.
With only 3 weeks remaining before competition it is decided that the system is way behind schedule and I now only hope to compete and not to win.

3/27/2026:
The new gearbox seems to work but gears wear out frequently so it is hoped to try various materials to fix this issue.
So far it has been concluded:
PLA is too soft and wears out quickly
ABS somewhat works but wears out quickly
Now PETG and Nylon are to be tried. but it is clear that these are harder to print well.
also it is realized that the holes in the gearbox for the interuptor are placed wrong so better ones are cut in by hand. these will be put into CAD later if time allows.

3/31/2026:
The software for the double speedometer test works but the interuptors themselves are to small so they are printed larger. they are currently held onto the shaft with hot glue but it is hoped that a more heat resistant method can be found later.

4/8/2026:
After much expiramentation it was detirmined that the PLA of the Interuptors does not allow block the infrared of the detector therefore the interuptors will be painted with black acrylic.
when the PETG gears were tested the gear arms broke so they have been glued back together with superglue. as all the school printers are currently broken if this does not work I am in trouble.

4/10/2026:
the interuptors work with black acrylic paint on them therefore the double speedometer can be properly tested now the only mechanical issue is the gears. which are in hindsight seen to be the hardest part anyway. because of the high friction it is attempted to manually run the gears for and extended time to observe their wear. and observed that they do indeed rub together to much calling into question their design, but it is too late to redesign them before competition.

4/14/2026:
The gears are tightened together with super glue this reduces stray movement making the machine far more efficient. now it spins fast enough while oiled under no load to make the little screws that hold the gears come loose. This is beleived to be related to using oil much thinner than should be used.

With thicker oil the machine sped up still further and vibrated harder making the grub screws come loose again. They were tightened and glued down then the gears spun even faster and the motor gear wore out quickly. it will be reprinted with PETG at 100% infill.

4/15/2026:
It has been verified that the issue is that the gearbox is too loose so extra washers have been added and the screws have been tightened now the gears seems to work.
